900-odd words on the same.
If you just tell me how you pronounce your name.
Andras Riedlmasa.
And what is that name?
It's Hungarian.
I'll give you a card, too.
We're in your office at the Fine Arts Library, also known as the Fogg Museum, isn't that right?
Yeah, it's in the Fogg Museum.
It's in the Fogg Museum.
Harvard University.
And your job here, Doctor?
Well, mystery is fine.
I'm a librarian.
I'm a bibliographer.
And we're here to talk generally about the catastrophe at the
And, you know, if this could be open-ended, why don't we just talk a little bit?
I put on the machine because you were saying some interesting things, so I may as well get them on tape.
All right.
Well, I've been active on this subject now since late 1992.
The greatest destruction of libraries took place in the first two years of the war, in 1992-93.
And the National Library in Sarajevo was nearly one of a number of libraries that was destroyed in the war.
In most cases, these were places that were deliberately targeted.
And I've talked to people involved with the war crimes tribunals.
They say the way they can determine deliberateness of targeting is by the pattern of shell impacts.
If you have a shell falling here, another there, you can pretty much conclude that it is random shelling.
If, however, you have a shell falling behind the building, in front of the building, and then 10 shells falling right on the building, then you know just from the targeting pattern that they meant to hit it.
And while the UN was never any good at protecting anybody, civilians or property, they were very good at recording and observing what was happening.
And in case of the National Library, in the case
of several other libraries like the Oriental Institute in Sarajevo, which is probably the biggest loss in terms of manuscript materials.
We're talking close to 6,000 bound manuscripts, over 200,000 historical documents.
That was hit on May 17th of 92, the National Library some months later on August 25th of 92.
Apparently there is an international effort afoot to try and... Well, I wouldn't dignify it as such.
If you look up the article in yesterday's New York Times, you'll find that the National Library points out that now four years after the event, they've had a lot of promises.
but very little in terms of firm commitments of money.
Rector of Bosnia's National Museum Library, who's now Assistant Minister of Education in charge of rebuilding, told me that he was so sick of yet another needs assessment conference that he is now refusing to attend anymore.
In the case of the National Library, for example, UNESCO has done so far, I believe, five international conferences convened at great expense, held in Prague, in Paris, and elsewhere, where people come and say, oh yes, the library needs to be rebuilt, and come up with some obvious and some sensible proposals.
But there's never any funding forthcoming.
UNESCO, at various points, sent in delegations of experts who come and take a look at the ruined buildings and say, yes, you will have to put a roof on this place before you put books in it.
But no money comes out of it.
The director general of UNESCO, Federico Mayor,
took a much publicized trip into Sarajevo two years after the destruction of the library and flew in with a symbolic gift of about 200 books donated by Altalia.
Those are the only books that UNESCO has ever delivered.
This is a multi-million dollar organization and they've got lots of staff sitting
in their Paris headquarters assessing.
Why is it so pathetically woeful, do you think?
First of all, I think the international library community and the intellectual community, people who supposedly care about culture and books, simply refuse to acknowledge what has taken place.
I think if we faced it squarely, we would be faced
with a need to do something about it, so it's easier simply not to think about it.
When you say they refuse to acknowledge what has taken place, you mean beyond the actual destruction, but the intent.
What you used the other day was the attack on memories.
Exactly.
What the purpose here was was not merely to destroy a building and its contents.
This was much more than a casualty of war.
Exactly.
Well, there has been a deliberate campaign in Sarajevo and Mostar and other cities to attack highly charged symbolic objects, first of all.
This means things like houses of worship, the Mostar Bridge, historic buildings, and on another level to attack archives and libraries.
In the case of
destroying records, you're pursuing a multiple purpose.
Number one, in the case of communities, you destroy things that give a focus to the community, that preserve its collective memory.
By attacking these, you're helping to terrify the inhabitants, break up the community, help drive people out in places that are overrun.
You also
ensure that in the long run, if you drive out people and you burned the records, there will be less reason for people to come back.
You know, the things that enshrine a community's past, the birth records, land ownership records, the literary records, all of these are things that you don't want to preserve if your goal is to transform the landscape, ethnically speaking.
then in an ideological sense, what moves these ideologies of national and ethnic purity, of which we unfortunately have a resurgence even in this country with all this xenophobia against immigrants and attacks on the notion that languages other than English ought to be spoken, etc.,
you have this notion that people cannot, in fact, live together if they are not all the same, if they are not all of one faith, one language, etc.
The problem is that the world, in reality, has never been like that.
In the case of a country like Bosnia, almost everybody speaks the same language, but since about a thousand years ago,
people have followed different faiths and religious traditions and have managed to coexist with each other.
The common language is what?
Well, the common language depends on who you talk to.
It's called Serbo-Croatian or Serbo-Croatian-Bosnian.
These are all typen Serbo-Croatian, Serbo-Croatian-Bosnian.
Yeah, and dialectically they're not much more different than varieties of English.
They have tended over the centuries to be written in different alphabets.
Eastern Orthodox tradition prefers the Cyrillic script.
The Latin tradition, you know, the Catholics tend to write in Latin alphabet, but it's the same dialect and the same language.
I mean, you cannot, from speaking to somebody from Sarajevo, tell whether he or she is a Croat, a Serb, or a Muslim.
And the religious classification in the last decade of the 20th century is pretty notional as well, because a very small minority of people consider themselves believers, let alone religiously observant.
So we're talking about an identity that is probably as divorced from religion as, say, that of most American Jews vis-a-vis their identity.
They're secure in their identification of Jews, but most of them will never see the inside of a synagogue.
And similarly, you find in Bosnia many people who will say, of course, I am a Muslim or a Serb or a Croat, but it doesn't mean that they ever go to a place of worship other than for a funeral.
Have you been to visit the site since the destruction?
Not since the destruction.
I was there before the war.
And are you a native of that region?
No, I'm not.
I'm from Hungary, which is two countries over.
Oh, I'm sorry.
You did say that.
I'm sorry.
Yeah, Europe is a complicated place.
And certainly the boundary lines have changed, you know.
So tell me about your own involvement in this.
Okay, well, I can tell you a little bit about it.
Before we get to that, perhaps let's put in, you mentioned how this is part of a systematic destruction of the people, the symbol, and are there any modern parallels or even historic parallels that you can have?
There are modern parallels.
For example, in the 1930s, the earliest stages of the persecutions of the Jews in Hitler's Germany were the systematic attacks on synagogues and Jewish institutions, Kristallnacht,
Germany.
And it was very much the same kind of notion.
In the 30s, I don't think, you know, Auschwitz had been thought of yet, but the notion was to get rid of every sign of a Jewish presence and thereby to terrify the Jewish community into leaving.
Much of the 1930s was the desperate seeking of refuge by Jews who were being methodically excluded from society in Hitler's Germany.
And the few countries that did accept the refugees benefited greatly thereby.
I mean, for example, in Turkey, the whole modern educational system was formed in the 30s and 40s by refugees from Germany.
I think I mentioned to you my interest in this aspect for this book.
And it's been suggested that Harvard, for instance, that...
That's an extraordinary statement.
I think you more or less corroborated it, didn't you?
In what respect would you corroborate?
I mean, are you aware of how these books... I don't mean to jump around, by the way, but if you don't mind, if you have any thoughts on that, on how materials managed to move from... Especially for people of a certain contemporary education.
books were the possessions they were least willing to part with.
Least willing?
Least willing.
I mean, they couldn't take their cars and their houses, and it made no sense to take their clothes, but many of the people who fled Hitler's Germany were educated people, professional people, academics, people who may have been businessmen but had real feeling for culture and letters, and
Very often, the things that they wanted to hang on to at all costs were their books, and in the case of art collections, their art, if they could take it out.
And you find, indeed, that people who left everything else behind will have at least brought one suitcase of books.
The link to Bosnia is sort of interesting because, again, talking to Kemal Vakasic, who is the former director of the National Museum
And he wrote a piece about this, didn't he?
Yeah.
I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
Where he and I have been corresponding via email, and he was telling me at one point that during the siege, for four winters, they had no fuel.
And, you know, first they burned all the furniture.
Then they tried burning clothes, but that didn't really work very well.
Eventually, they got down to the point where they had to burn books to cook their miserable food.
Did he burn books?
Yes.
Initially, he said it was very easy.
Anybody has books in their house that they have no use for, old phone books, your high school chemistry textbook.
No, no, wait.
And then anybody who was educated in the communist era probably has the collected works of Marx and Lenin, et cetera, that they have to purchase and which they feel no qualms.
Then eventually you get down to reference books.
You figure they get outdated anyway.
You build a real skill on how to make a book burn well.
You form the pages in a certain way so it doesn't smolder, but gives you a nice... Yes.
I don't have it, unfortunately.
Maybe it's up before.
Let's remember that you should give me his email address, by the way.
And he says, but then the point comes when you've run out of the things that are easy, and he says, you really have to start making decisions.
Do I take this one?
They're not a choice.
I mean, if you're starving and all you have is beans, you can't eat beans uncooked.
any degrees outside, and it's winter.
And you don't want to freeze to death.
So, on one hand, you have your favorite book of poems.
On the other, a novel you've read, but you want a treasure.
You have to figure out which one to burn.
Does he speak English?
Oh, yeah, excellent.
So, I mean, I could correspond with him?
Oh, yeah, very much so.
Should you make an introduction for me, or should I just write him off the top?
You can mention my name, or I can write to him and mention that you're interested.
I'd love to begin a correspondence with him.
Yeah, he's a fascinating guy.
But I'd like to go there, by the way.
I'm hopeful that you can assist me in... Oh, sure.
I can tell you somebody who just went there.
Okay.
So, a lot of people had to do this, and it really broke their heart.
It goes against the grain.
And as I say, you first learn books that you don't really consider books.
And then you burn books, which you acknowledge are books, but you don't really value very much.
And then you come to that point later.
He says he did.
I have two pictures of him, one taken one year into the war and one recently.
He's a relatively young guy, he's in his 30s, and he looks like... He's married to a... He's a Muslim, right?
Yeah.
And I think his wife is... Although it's interesting, in his article it says, I'm a Muslim by heritage, but I'm really an atheist.
Yeah, okay.
I'm a computer man.
His wife is a pro-op background.
He's a librarian.
Of course.
And...
And she teaches at Sarajevo University.
He's currently the Assistant Minister of Education, but he figures after the September elections there'll be a new government.
He doesn't want to be in politics.
He was sort of drafted into this because of wartime conditions.
So even though he's gotten big-money offers from the World Bank, he wants to go back to...
He teaches at the library school at the University of Sarajevo.
How did you make his acquaintance?
Through an editor in New York who published both of us in The New Combat.
What is The New Combat?
The New Combat is the brainchild of a gentleman named William Ney.
N-E-Y, but it's pronounced as if it were the other way around.
And he's a young guy.
Named it in honor of Le Combat, which appeared during the Resistance era in France by all—one of the early editors was Camus.
And it was in the Journal of Reason and Resistance.
It comes out rather irregularly, I think.
He's on his fourth issue.
And it deals with human rights around the globe.
And he had a special issue on the war in the form of Yugoslavia in the fall of 94.
Maybe I can get a copy of that for you.
Yeah, yeah, I can give you his address.
New Combat, A Journal of Reason and Resistance.
So, you both did a piece?
And, you know, so he says, do you know this guy?
I said no, and he says, well, one thing led to another.
So, it's all email correspondence?
Yeah, I've never met him in person.
But, I mean, do you write actual letters, or are they email letters?
People treat email in different ways.
A lot of people dash off email letters the minute they've received something, and they never read carefully what came in in the first place.
They scan it, and then they sort of, off the top of their head, respond.
Sort of the electronic equivalent of a spontaneous phone call.
Other people, myself included, treat email like a treat real mail, meaning I read it.
Sometimes I don't respond right away.
I sleep on it, deal with it when I have time.
And then when I write my response, I proofread it.
You take care.
I do with a real letter.
And actually what bothers me is when I can tell from the response that the recipient hasn't read it like he would a real letter.
But this is how you've corresponded with this gentleman?
Yeah, we haven't done it very frequently.
He's a very busy guy, but I think he's a great guy.
I personally met the director of Bosnia's National Library.
He was in Boston in 1994.
Some colleagues at the University of Michigan, through UNESCO, arranged for him to come out of Sarajevo
And he toured some North American libraries and stayed with my colleague, Jesper, just a block away from him.
You haven't been since the destruction.
What do you think you'd see?
I've talked to people who've been there recently.
On a trip for me, what would be the great benefit?
What would I learn that I couldn't?
Oh, you would learn a great deal, I think.
First of all, anybody who goes there is impressed by the
pervasiveness of the destruction.
I mean, virtually every building.
You mean in the city?
In the city, yeah.
And you can see how it's concentrated.
I mean, the Oriental Institute, for example, the Oriental Institute constituted the top two stories of a hundred-year-old office building.
It was built back under the Habsburgs.
and it's in a dense neighborhood.
None of the neighboring buildings are particularly badly shot up.
This one is completely gutted the top two floors.
During the war, there was an incredible market for books.
There were basically two sources of food.
stand in line for the UN food rations, which often exposed you to danger because the food lines were particular targets.
Or if you wanted things other than beans and rice, you could deal on the black market.
And people would often spend the equivalent of a week's food rations just to buy books.
There were over 200 titles published in the first three years of the war.
in Sarajevo, mostly in very small press runs because they didn't have a lot of paper.
But people had a real need for it.
Was it literature?
Was it history?
Was it a mix?
It was a mix.
There were volumes of poetry printed.
I have some translations.
New things?
New things.
There were memoirs.
There was the usual political-cultural stuff, current stuff.
In many cases, people explained to me
You know, you spend week after week cowering in a stairway or in a basement, and you can't really do your everyday activity.
And to prove that you're not just an animal struggling for survival, intellectual activity is what remains.
It's the same sort of principle that causes people to write poetry in prison.
Is there a formal name for this war?
Is there a name for this war?
A lot of people call it various things.
The war in Bosnia is what a lot of people call it.
This is something that was put together in March of last year by the Open Society Institute, this Thesaurus Foundation.
And it's just a list of various institutions and what they need.
But the touching thing is in the back, the pictures of various institutions.
I can show you some of them.
This is the National Museum.
That's a direct hit from a tank shell.
You can see these old buildings tended to survive a lot better if they were built.
That's the National Gallery.
That's a 16th century library, the oldest in Sarajevo.
That one I heard various stories about.
One was that it was actually shelled
And in May of 1992, it's the Ghazi Husrevbeg Library, was shelled in May of 92.
And they had the presence of mind of the defenders of setting up some smoke grenades right in the entrance, after which the shelling stopped, because they figured they had set it on fire.
And then when darkness fell, they evacuated the library successfully.
So basically there was some damage, but they didn't lose any of that possible.
There was a woman, I read, Diane Rilkes has a book of libraries, she has a paragraph in there, and there was a woman, apparently, in the library, who was killed.
Yes, she's a sister of a friend of mine, actually.
I mean, I will name her in this book.
I mean, this to me is a, you know, a bookminer in many ways, isn't she?
Yeah.
Her name is Aida Buturovich.
And it is, it's spelled in...
Yeah, yeah.
Aida Butorovic was, I believe, 23 or 24 years old.
I can find out for you.
Her sister lives in Toronto.
And she was one of two sisters of an intellectual family.
The father's a lawyer, the mother teaches at the conservatory.
Both of the girls were university educated.
And Aida was pursuing a PhD.
in philology, but also working as a librarian in the National Library's exchange of sections.
And kept on working during the war, even though it was dangerous to go to and from work.
And then on the 25th of August, 92, she heard that the National Library was on fire.
And she told her parents, the library's on fire.
I've got to go now.
And as they saw her, colleagues saw her at the burning library helping to evacuate folks.
In mid-afternoon, she got tired after having worked all day and started home, and she hadn't gotten more than a block or two before she was murdered by a sniper.
You've got to know that snipers look their victims in the face.
These are random shots.
These are targeted, perceived people.
There are videos recorded of Radovan Karadzic, the leader of the Republic of Srpska, standing up at a Serbian sniper position with a Russian visitor, pointing out how through the scope you can see everybody inviting the Russian to take a shot, and the Russian does.
He does, to shoot somebody.
Several reporters also have reports of being made the same offer.
They say they refuse.
Where are we going?
Yeah.
I mean, all wars have this kind of thing, but not to this degree.
Anyway, the sad story about Aida is her parents, of course, got frantic when she didn't return.
23 years old.
And it's not that she had wanted to die or risk herself needlessly.
She'd gotten engaged just a week before.
to her long-time boyfriend.
She was looking forward to life, but she felt that she needed to do this.
Her parents identified her at the morgue the next day.
Her father was absolutely crushed and started visiting his daughter's grave regularly and was killed by a shell blast less than a year later on his way to visit his daughter's grave.
Their other daughter was outside of Bosnia.
She had just left before the war broke out to pursue a PhD at McGill and now in Toronto.
The destruction, as you pointed out, 1.5 million, approximately, books.
It's, without a doubt, the largest single incident of deliberate book burning in modern history.
There were several pre-modern book
destructions.
One was, of course, the Library of Alexandria.
Which is arguable how that happened.
Arguable how many times it was burned and what was in it.
There's the Chinese emperor who ordered all the Buddhist scriptures destroyed.
And again, who knows how many there were.
In this case, there were between one and a half and two million items in the library.
Now, once you get a library that size, it's hard to get an accurate item count, because a pamphlet and an encyclopedia are both items.
But in any case, the number of books destroyed approaches one and a half million.
But it's more than numbers.
I mean, what's the population of this country?
Four million people, and when the library was formed after World War II, it incorporated the
collections of cultural societies.
This is the central repository.
And this was the central repository, so they had the country's most complete collection of everything published in Bosnia.
When I asked the National Library what he missed most of all the things that got burned, he says, the stuff that will be impossible to replace, he said, are all the small literary journals, all the local periodicals from the early part of the century.
which probably were preserved nowhere else.
He said the big standard items, even the rare books, you can replicate.
There will be copies of them elsewhere.
And are they trying to do that?
Oh, yes.
That's a different story, and I'll tell you about it more.
But he says, you know, the journals of small literary societies, the records of cultural associations, they had large archival collections as well.
He says things like this.
The library had over 100,000 different postcards.
Musical scores, ephemera, theater posters, all of that went.
And, of course, they know, in a general sense, what was lost, but I suspect— They lost their card catalog.
They lost their documentation, so they really can't— Like most large libraries, they were in the middle of making plans for converting their catalog to electronic form.
The war broke out in 1992.
In 1989, they had begun to put online their new acquisitions.
They hadn't yet begun to convert their older records.
Which would take years.
Decades.
So they have about four years' worth of acquisitions for which they have electronic records, and beyond that, they can only guess.
And they just are cruel teasers, really, of what they had anyway.
In the other days, there's a record of what was there and which is now gone.
Now, the ways in which they're working on this, Kema Obakash, the guy I mentioned to you, has started a journal called Bosniaca, which is devoted to substantive scholarly articles on reconstructing the country's literary heritage, which has been destroyed.
And so the first issue has already appeared.
That's one way.
Another way is when the National Librarian was here and then subsequently he sent his head cataloger out, I took him to see the systems people at Harvard and they were very good.
They gave over an hour of their time and we talked about various ways in which to do this and finally came up that
In today's electronic age, we have a real possibility in that major American research libraries have very large portions of the printed record, at least, in various institutions.
And most of these large research institutions are members of bibliographic utilities, OCLC, Arlen, these large cataloging consortia.
OCLC, I know, what's the other one?
R-L-I-N.
It's the Research Library's Information Network.
Arlen is based in Palo Alto.
OCLC is based in Dublin, Ohio.
This one is done.
The project, the way it worked out is... I'm sorry, we're in California?
Palo Alto.
Are we out there?
Anyway, Arlen so far is not involved in any event, and it's the smaller of the two.
OCLC is, however, as you know, quite big, and they also have a European operation.
And a woman at Yale University, a librarian named Tanya Lorcovich, you can find her name in yesterday's New York Times article.
Well, let me be able to copy that before I go into it.
Sure.
Anyway, Tanya contacted the librarians at Yale.
I got the systems librarians here to contact others.
And so the upshot was a meeting at that year's ALA meeting in the spring of 95.
And as a result of which the president of Yale University Library and director of Harvard University Library wrote to the director of OCLC and proposed the project, which OCLC then agreed to do, of
having bibliographers initially at Harvard, Yale, and Michigan, but ultimately to involve others, work out certain targeting criteria by place of imprint, subject words, authors' names, and so forth, to develop a master bibliography of things having to do with Bosniaca.
The definition of Bosniaca
B-O-S-N-I-C-A, is books either printed in Bosnia in any language on any subject, or books published elsewhere that deal with the subject of Bosnia.
In other words, the things that a national library ought to have.
And OCLC would take care of doing the searches, of having their research people refine them, and come up with a master list
which would also include locations.
This would be then made available to the Bosnians, who could then do the work of weeding duplicates.
As you know, libraries catalog the same books, sometimes in different forms.
And then from that, producing a subset of records for items they absolutely feel they must have.
Now, in the case of most of the American libraries,
they're involved in massive reformatting projects anyway, microfilming, scanning, disks, whatever.
The trick then would be to contact one of the major microform vendors, there are several, IDC and others, and propose a project whereby they would photograph or scan
the items on the list that the Bosnians then designate.
The donor libraries would get sets for the things that they donated, thereby relieving them of the cost of having to do preservation microfilming in the first place.
The Bosnians would get a set which would be their virtual national library collection.
And the vendor could then market sets for other interested parties, and there would probably be enough of the commercial market out there to at least defray the cost.
Has any of this transpired?
The project was announced this February, and there was a small item on it in American libraries, I believe in the February issue.
And I got the citation for you.
I think for the moment, for OCLC, it's a fairly low-priority project, mainly because they're a commercial company.
They're not making money on it, but it's a long-term undertaking.
But it's good PR for them, and ultimately it's not going to be very costly for them.
They have lots of excess data storage capacity anyway.
It's mainly a question of staff time.
As we all know, that's an elastic commodity.
They were very good during the Bloomberg trial.
I mean, they really contributed.
No, no, they liked it.
They did the videotape.
You know, what I wish would happen is if we could get some higher profiling for this, which might attract, you know, a publisher or a government agency or a foundation to pour some money into it to get it moving faster.
But at least you've got institutional commitments by some pretty major institutions like Harvard and Yale in Michigan.
You've got OCLC, at least in theory, committed to this.
And I think this holds a real possibility.
And given that nowadays many people, even in Europe, do their cataloging through OCLC, it wouldn't be that hard for the Bosnians to do a system link.
Well, how much of their history do you think is recoverable?
It's hard to say.
I mean, one glimpse of this, there was an American professor named Joel Halpern who lives in Amherst, an anthropologist who, while he was teaching at UCLA in the late 50s, got a grant to go to Bosnia and elsewhere in Yugoslavia and purchase books.
This was only about a decade after the Tito takeover, and one of the first things that communist regimes generally did is to dissolve or take over all sort of independent cultural organizations, you know, from the Chamber of Commerce to culture clubs, etc.
And usually the process would involve confiscating their libraries.
In the cases of the really large organizations, the libraries were incorporated in national collection, but in many other cases they'd just be locked in a room and would be sold off at random.
And Halpern was telling me back then he was running around and buying books by the kilo.
And so he brought back over 50,000 items to UCLA.
The stuff sat on process at UCLA for several decades.
You know, most of it was small stuff, pamphlet-y stuff.
It wasn't seen as important to help inscribe dismay.
Some of it was arbitrarily even discarded.
But there was renewed interest after the war broke out, and the commercial firm based in New York microfilmed the whole set and is now selling it for outrageous sums, several thousand dollars.
to large research libraries that buy such things.
Now, I've gotten Halpern to get in touch with the publisher to see if they would donate a set to the Bosnians.
I can't see any reason why they wouldn't.
The materials cost is minimal.
So that's still... That's in negotiation.
Now, the third item is my project, and if you want to come up to the computer, I can show you, which is to try to recover your project.
Yeah.
I mean, all these others I'm involved with in various ways.
Can you grab a chair?
Sure.
Let me just put this here.
Yeah.
Name the project for me.
Okay.
It's called the Bosnian Manuscripts in-gathering project.
My project was born out of a...
discussion among three of us, and all three of us are involved, so it's our project, really.
Bosnian manuscripts.
In-gathering project.
Let me get you to it.
I went to the URL at the time, but I can show you a little bit more, and I can print you out.
This is a faster printer, probably, than the one you've done.
Come on, slip, look.
Creating the destruction of memory, a call for an in-gathering of Bosnian manuscripts.
Because I have a page here.
A friend of mine.
Actually, I supplied this.
This is a Bosnian manuscript from the Middle Ages.
I'm not sure if it's obvious, but the CD and the document together form a lowercase b, and shows the document emerging from the CD.
That's wonderful.
And this is the address you gave me, too.
I can get into this.
Yeah, so this is the address.
And the general notion is
We were talking, the first time I gave Bosnia talk, we were talking with the sister of the librarian who got killed, is an orientalist herself, and she'd worked at the Oriental Institute in Sarajevo, which as I told you is the largest manuscript library among many that were targeted in Bosnia.
And as she and I were talking,
It occurred to both of us that many of these institutions that were destroyed had a fairly high profile in the world of scholarship and had hosted many foreign scholars who had gone there to do research and presumably had gone back with copies of items they had studied, photographs, microfilms, notes they had taken.
Sometimes they had published items.
In the case at least of the Oriental Institute, they had been very active in pursuing exchanges, meaning let's say an institute in Berlin would designate X number of items that they were interested in and they would exchange for an equal number of items.
And so when the institute was burned up in an attack in May of 92,
Among the things that were destroyed were scores of cabinets of microfilms.
And from this I conclude that an equal number of cabinets of microfilms exists scattered throughout Europe bearing some portion of what was irrecoverably lost.
And so we designated this and we had no funding, no personnel, but we figured we could do it number one on the web.
which wouldn't reach many of the target people, but would at least help publicize it.
Number two, by publicizing it in scholarly journals of the appropriate fields.
And number three, ultimately, and we haven't really gotten started on that, to track down people through citation analysis, just look who has published
work based on original Bosnian materials.
Track down scholars and write them letters saying, do you have in your study items?
And the idea would be not to actually gather here in Harvard or in Toronto, where our other collaborator lives, actual copies of anything, but simply to compile a directory of where these copies of lost originals now reside.
Present those to the Bosnians.
The Oriental Institute is still together, and they then can either seek funding or approach these people themselves and say, can you let us have a copy, which we used to have and now you have a copy of.
And you're compiling a record, too.
You have a record here.
It won't just be over there.
Yeah, I mean, the record will reside all over the place.
Anybody who gets to this home page can click on this interactive form.
that document registration form, and simply enter into these things, which are all sort of infinitely expandable.
Their address, the particulars on what they have, is it a microfilm, a microfiche, a photograph, etc., which reproduces the original in a whole or in part, what was the original...
the title, the authors, the languages, the alphabets, basic publication data.
If it's manuscript data, then you have things like the first few lines, last few lines.
Anyway, and they fill it out, and it immediately comes to a database.
And where?
Who monitors this?
The person who monitors it is my friend Dr. Irvin Schick, who works for BBN.
Both Baranek and Newman here in Cambridge.
He's sort of a renaissance man.
He's a computer scientist, but has a PhD in mathematics, but also has humanistic interests, has written many articles on literary theory and various other things.
So he's quite involved.
So he's done the electronic wizardry for this.
I can't claim credit for any of it.
Oh, it's quite magnificent.
Has it yielded much results?
So far, this has been up less than a year so far.
And in terms of actual items from Bosnia, we've had three major interactions.
One was
Stefano Carbone, who is an assistant curator of Islamic art at Metropolitan Museum, who actually came to one of my talks.
And I talked at the Air College Art Association Conference in Boston this February.
And as part of the talk, I showed slides, including one of the manuscripts from the Oriental Institute.
And it came up very disturbed afterwards and said,
Are you sure it's destroyed?
I worked on that manuscript.
It breaks my heart.
I'd heard the Institute had been destroyed, but I'd hoped that at least some of the contents were saved.
And I said, no, I have a fax from the director of the Institute saying that virtually everything is lost.
And so I told him about this project, and not long afterwards, we got a message from him saying that...
The manuscript in question was a 15th century Islamic astrological treatise, and half of the treatise was in Sarajevo, the other half in a private art collection in England.
The owner of the private art collection in England had color photographs and a full microfilm of the Sarajevo portion of the manuscript.
Wow, that's wonderful.
At the moment, we've contacted the collector, and he will be sending copies to Sarajevo via a British diplomatic pouch.
That's spectacular.
So that has been the most spectacular.
Do you remember, did you tell me the name of it, of what it was?
It's an untitled manuscript.
I can show you an article on it that he wrote.
It's an astrological manuscript from 15th century.
Another minor coup was through Professor Halpern.
How do you spell Halpern?
H-A-L-P-E-R-N, who back in the 1950s secured from the National Museum a set of photographs of Bosnian village architecture and village life, some of them taken from before World War II.
And these wound up at the American Museum of Natural History.
where, again, nobody's looked at them and they feel it's sort of outside their purview and weren't quite sure what to do with them.
And so we've written them and they've sent us a full set of Xeroxes of it and are quite willing to share copies or maybe even the original with the Bosnians.
So there have been a few along this... There was a third one?
Yeah, there was a third item, which was a set of microfilms of archival documents, which we tracked down in Turkey.
That, again, was not through the web, but through personal contact, but they supplied the particulars.
That's a pretty daunting task, when you figure in a year you've gotten three, as wonderful as those three back.
Well, the thing is, we haven't been working full-time.
I also, subsequent to our starting this, found out that this is not a first.
There have been at least two successful reconstitutions of libraries and archives in this century.
Really?
One was in World War I, where the library of the Catholic University in Louvain was burned down by the Nazis.
I'm sorry, but I can print it out for you.
I've got a little thing on it.
That would be great.
Anyway, L-O-U-V-A-I-N.
Don't mind my asking.
This was in 1914, August of 1914.
On the very day, August 25th, 1914, which 80-odd years later was the date that the National Library in Sarajevo was burned down, the German army had rolled into Belgium at the beginning of World War I.
Louvain was undefended.
It's been done before.
So you can just click there.
And anyway, about a week after the Germans occupied the city, there was some shooting in the middle of the night.
Recent scholarship inclines to the opinion that it was probably nervous German soldiers shooting at each other in the night.
But at the time, the Germans didn't launch an investigation.
They immediately decided on the reprisals.
They shot 200 people in the city and then cordoned off the district where the shooting had taken place and methodically destroyed every building.
It was an old Flemish cloth-making town, so they were very solid stone buildings, so each building had to be set afire individually.
And at the center of it was the library.
And German soldiers probably didn't even know it was the library, but, you know, they broke up in the basement and then rolled in some kerosene drums and set the place ablaze.
It burned for many days.
Anyway, even before the war was over, this aroused tremendous amount of outrage throughout the world, this being World War I.
One of the first to call for a fund drive to rebuild the library at Levin was Harvard's president, Abbott Lawrence Lowell.
And there were fund drives in all the neutral countries.
Back then, the U.S.
wasn't in the war yet.
This was 1915.
And after the war, the Americans were very much involved, and when Levin was finally rebuilt as a physical structure,
The flags of all the American universities that had played an active part in the rebuilding were arrayed in the reading room.
In terms of reconstituting the actual library, they pursued a very interesting technique.
As in the case of Sarajevo, the catalog was lost, but they had large partial inventories that had been published and otherwise preserved.
They established a trust fund into which some of the German reparation money went after the Treaty of Versailles.
The income of the trust fund through the 1960s provided for the purchase of books for the Louvain Library.
In addition, originally it was proposed that major German libraries go through their stocks of duplicate manuscripts and rare books.
where you have more than one manuscript copy of something or more than one of incunabulum, and that they be compelled to give up an equal number in terms of number and rarity of what was destroyed at Levant.
Eventually it was decided that this was not a practical way to proceed, and instead major book dealers were simply commissioned to buy books.
This made the German librarians happier because they didn't have to give up their own books.
And it provided tremendous stimulus for the book trade right after World War I because there were major sums involved.
Also because there was tremendous inflation in Europe at the time and a lot of people had fallen on hard times.
There were a lot of books coming on the market.
And so Louvain's new collection was...
Quite distinguished.
Unfortunately, in World War II it was again destroyed.
And again rebuilt.
In the case of Naples, the most valuable portions of the state archives of Naples were evacuated from Naples in 1944 as the front line was coming closer in order to safeguard them.
Now, ironically, the stuff that was left behind in Naples was never harmed.
The stuff, however, that had been evacuated to a villa in the countryside fell afoul of a local German commander who burned their place down.
And almost before the war was over, the Neapolitans were busy reconstituting the lost medieval archives of Naples.
How?
From crappies that were known to be?
Well, the archives had been active since the 13th century.
And since the 13th century, it had been used by various people, by genealogical researchers, by people who published scholarly articles from the 18th, 19th century onwards, by people who had taken manuscript notes, who had published portions of it, or who had photographs of it.
And the publication project was begun right after the war.
And as of last year, I think 44 volumes have been published.
of the reconstituted archives.
How did you find out about these things?
Louvain, I happened to know about because I'd once read a book that had a reference to it, and I have one of these trash can mines, so I read in trivia.
That's a good step.
This is wonderful.
In the case of the Naples archives, I hadn't known about it, but an archivist saw my website and told me about it.
So let me print out some other stuff.
If you don't mind, this is wonderful.
You're saving me a lot of... As you know, you can... There's so much I can't possibly print it out for you, but you can print it all out.
But there's a lot of stuff here.
For example, here's a picture of the National Library when it was Rio that Drexel University helped produce for me.
Wow.
Library on fire.
As it was burning on August 25th, almost the anniversary.
Built in, actually, exactly a hundred years ago, 1896, it opened Sarajevo City Hall.
And then after World War II, it was taken over to become the new National Library.
Most of what they saved, in addition to the stuff, built right out of the burning building.
were materials that were in remote storage that had run out of space.
That's unfortunate because most of the stuff in remote storage is things in low demand because they weren't particularly interesting to anyone.
The periodical titles were all in there.
Look at the thing burn.
That's amazing.
What's left now is just a shell, right?
I can show you what's left.
One of ours who donated this website teaches at the University of Florida and is a computer guy.